that in general relativity you can have
a tunnel through the fabric of space
linking one location and the other
Einstein developed that idea too in 1935
just two months apart from quantum
entanglement for 90 years nobody thought
there was any connection between these
two ideas string theory has recently
revealed that it's very likely that
these two ideas are the same idea
described in different languages that
when you have two particles that are
quantum entangled in some sense there is
a tunnel through the fabric of space a
wormhole that is connecting them
[Music]
together hello everybody I had the
opportunity and privilege today to speak
with Dr Brian Green who's a physicist
and an author of a number of books the
book we delved into most deeply today
was the elegant Universe super strings
hidden dimensions and the Quest for the
ultimate theory that was originally
published in 1999 but he's offering an
updated version as of 2024 and so we had
a chance to delve into the mysteries of
quantum mechanics special relativity and
string theory and string theory is a
branch of physics that was designed or
emerged to deal with the contradictions
that exist between general relativity
and quantum mechanics and so what did we
do in our discussion well we talked
about quantum mechanics and what it
means and signifies we talked about the
theory of general relativity we talked
about the nature of time and the nature
of entropy which is which are Concepts
that are quite tightly related we talked
about the infamous double slit theor um
experiment which is uh a mind twister to
say the least uh we talked about the
potential testing of string theory we
talked about what it has to offer and uh
what we we we talked about
Consciousness and the perception of time
and the relationship between the
perception of time and entropy and the
expansion of the universe and
uh and we talked about situating
that more
narrow pursuit of the truths of physics
in a what in a more broadly humanistic
Approach To The World At Large and so if
you're interested in the mysteries of
physics and the relationship between the
various deep theories of physics to one
another and trying to develop some
understanding of Cutting Edge inquiry in
that regard particularly with in
relationship to string theory let's say
then this is the conversation for you
and thanks to Dr Brian Green for
agreeing to put up with my questions and
and for sharing his deep
knowledge with me and my
viewers so Dr Green you've written a
number of books I think I'll just list
them and if I miss any I don't think I
will but if I do let me know until the
end of time that was 2020 light
falls 2016 the hidden reality 20
Icarus at the Edge of Time 2008 the
fabric of the cosmos
2004 and the elegant Universe super
strings hidden dimensions and the Quest
for the ultimate theory that was
published originally in 1999 but it's
been updated for 2024 and I guess that's
part of the occasion for our discussion
and so you you've been investigating and
popularizing uh Advanced physics for a
very long time and I guess we'll have an
opportunity to delve into that today so
I want to go through the elegant
Universe in some detail but if you don't
mind I'd like to take this opportunity
to ask you some questions that I've been
wanting to ask a theoretical physicist
for a long time and um and that'll help
me Rectify some holes in my
knowledge so the first I wanted to ask
you about two things that are related to
begin with one has to do with time and
and its relationship to entropy and I
just want to see if I understand that
relationship I have some specific
reasons for that because there are
attempts in the Neuroscience literature
to tie emotional processing both on the
positive and negative side to the
concept of entropy and I did some work
on that topic especially with negative
emotion in my lab and I want to make
sure that I actually understand the
underlying concept so and it should be
of some interest to the people who are
watching and listening so the first the
first question I have is is whether or
not it's reasonable to is there a
distinction between time and change I
mean my sense is that and this ties us
into the entropy discussion I guess to
some degree I mean my sense is is that
our perception of time
which is difficult to distinguishable
from time itself as a phenomenon our
perception of time is something like our
abstraction of average rates of change
and it also seems to me that in a system
where there's no change like a closed
system where there's no change there's
also no time and that time is something
like the walk through the multiple
states that a complex system can be in
and that that's essentially associated
with something with with entropy and now
is there anything wrong very close not
really at all okay I I I say that the
real the real challenge to give a
precise answer to your question which is
a good one the challenge is nobody has a
real definition of what the word time
actually means what it is the best that
we can do in physics is it that there is
some access there is some quality that
we can measure change by invoking much
as you just described we say that time
has elapsed because the system has
changed but is that a real definition of
time not not really it's a very
pragmatic approach in our equations we
have a little variable called T it's
introduced in basically all the
dynamical equations physics and yet we
are still struggling to figure out is it
something we impose from the outside
because it's a useful way of organizing
experience to have a temporal order to
things is it fundamentally written into
the laws of reality that there is this
thing called time might there be Realms
of reality where there is no time and
yet there's still something there that
we would call in existence so these are
the big tough questions that we've yet
to fully been able to Grapple with yeah
well I I saw Richard Dawkins recently
being interviewed by Pierce Morgan and
Pierce was struggling with the idea that
there was no time before the Big Bang
and that obviously violates our embodied
intuitions right which are strongly
tilted in the direction of presuming
time as a constant and but but I would
even say the framing of that question is
an interesting one because to talk about
before the Big Bang is to assume that
the notion of before is applicable in
that extraordinarily different realm of
existence in everyday life of course the
word before makes sense but when you get
right back to the Big Bang it could be
that this conception of time emerges
with that event and the Very concept of
before may be meaningless it's like you
know Steph Hawking had a great analogy
here which was because if you're walking
on planet Earth and you pass somebody
you tell ask them which way is North
they point you northward You Keep On
Walking you ask somebody else how do I
go further north they point you further
north as well when you get to the North
Pole and you say to somebody there how
do I go further north than the North
Pole they look at you quizzically
because it doesn't make any sense you've
reached the location on Earth where
North Begins the Big Bang could in
principle be the location in reality
where time begins and going further back
in time may be as nonsensical as going
further north than the North Pole well
this is exactly the the difficulty of
conceptualization that pierce was
struggling with and to me it's a lot
easier to understand that if you
understand that there is no fundamental
distinction between time and change and
so if time if the existence of time is
predicated let's say on the existence
not only of matter but of matter that's
changing
and you have a state where there's
either no matter or the matter that is
there is is not changing in any manner
the whole notion of time vanishes
because the phenomenon itself doesn't
exist and okay so all right so then let
me ask you about the idea of entropy a
little bit um
so I it's very difficult for me to
understand entropy except in
relationship to something like a a goal
so so let me let me lay out how this
might work
psychologically um uh Carl friston has
been working on this he's the world's
most cited neuroscientist and I
interviewed him relatively recently and
he has a notion of positive emotion
that's associated with entropy reduction
and um we our work has run parallel with
regards to the idea of anxiety as a
signal of entropy so imagine that you
have a a state of mind in mind that's a
a goal you just want to cross the street
that's a good simple uh that's a good
simple example
now imagine that what you're doing is
comparing the state that you're in now
you're on one side of the street to the
state that you want to be in which is
for your body to be on the other side of
the street and
and then you calculate the
Transformations that are necessary the
energy expenditure and the actions that
are necessary to transpose the one
condition into the state of the other
condition then you could imagine there's
path length between that right which
would be the number of operations
necessary to undertake the
transformation then you could imagine
that you could assign to each of those
Transformations something approximating
an energy and materials expenditure cost
and then you could determine whether the
advantage of being across the street
maybe it's closer to the grocery store
let's say whether the advantages
outweigh the
disadvantages okay now if You observe
yourself successfully taking steps that
shorten the path length across the
street that produces positive emotion
and that seems to be technically true
and then if something gets in your way
or an obstacle emerges or something
unexpected happens then that increases
the path length and costs you more
energy and resources and that produces
anxiety now the the the problem with
that from an entropy perspective is it
seems to make what constitutes entropy
dependent
on the the psychological nature of the
target like I don't exactly know how to
how to define one state as say more
entropic and maybe it doesn't make sense
more entropic than another except in
relationship to a like a perceived end
point I mean otherwise I mean I guess
you associate entropy with a random walk
through all the different configurations
that a body of material might take um at
a certain temperature it's something
like that and I would say it analogous
to that but a little bit different so
what we do is we look at the space of
all possible configurations of a system
whether it's a psychological system or
whether it's air molecules in a box it
doesn't really matter to us the way we
humans interpret that system we simply
look at the particles that make up the
system and we divide up the space of all
possible configurations into regions
that from a macroscopic perspective are
largely indistinguishable right the air
in this room it doesn't matter to me
whether that oxygen moleculees in that
corner or that corner it would be
indistinguishable butun was in a little
functionally equivalent but if all the
air was in a little ball right over here
and none was left for me to breathe then
I would certainly know the difference
between that configuration of the gas
and the one that I'm actually inhabiting
at the moment so they would belong to
different regions of this configuration
space which I divide up into blobs that
macroscopically are indistinguishable
and we simply Define the entropy in some
sense to be the volume of that region so
high entropy means there are a lot of
states that more or less look the same
like the gas in this room right now but
if the gas was in a little ball would
have lower entropy because there far
fewer rearrangements of those
constituents that look the same as the
ball of gas so it's a very
straightforward mathematical exercise to
enumerate the entropy of a configuration
by figuring out which of the regions it
belongs to but none of that involves the
psychological states that you make
reference to now there may be
interesting analogies interesting poetic
resonances interesting rhyming between
the things that one is interested in
from a psychological perspective and
from a physics perspective but the
beauty or the downfall depending how you
look at it of the way we Define things
in physics we kind of strip away the
psycholog logical we strip away the
Observer dependent qualities we strip
away the interpretive aspects in order
to just have a numerical value of
entropy that we can associate to a given
configuration so we could start by
talking
about depression
depressed people are sad and frustrated
and disappointed they tend to feel all
negative emotions simultaneously in a
manner that's
paralyzing depression is fundamentally a
biochemical disorder one of the things I
tried to determine as a good behaviorist
was whether the person who was suffering
was suffering because they were ill in
the strictly physiological sense or
whether they were suffering uffing from
the cumulative micro and macro
catastrophes of
Life the probability that tossing an
anti-depressant into the mix is all of a
sudden going to fix your life that are
absolutely catastrophically out of order
is zero the more unstable your life is
the less serotonin your brain produces
and that makes you hyp sensitive to
negative emotion and suppresses positive
emotion
you take the problem I'm suffering and
then you think well why are you
suffering it's exposure therapy and then
you can practice encountering the
obstacles that are stopping you and
it'll make you braver and it'll help you
deal with your problems voluntary
confrontation with the forces of
darkness and chaos is the fundamental
story of
[Music]
life right well what you're trying to do
when you control a situation
psychologically is to specify the I
suppose it's something like specifying
the entropy right because you're trying
to calculate the number of states that
the situation that you're in now could
conceivably occupy if you undertook an
appropriate uh what would you say an
appropriate course of action and as long
as while you're specifying that course
of action the system maintains its
desired Behavior then it's it's not for
example it's not anxiety-provoking and
you can presume that you're course of
action is functional and and I say if
that proves to be if that proves to be a
valuable definition to acquire insight
into perhaps human behavior the
psychological reasons for crossing that
street as you were describing before
then that may be valuable within that
environment the reason why we find
entropy valuable as physicists is we
like to be able to figure out the
general way in which systems evolve over
time
and when the systems are very
complicated again be it gas in this room
or the molecules inside of our heads
it's simply too complicated for us to
actually do the molecule by molecule
calculation of how the particles are
going to move from today until tomorrow
instead we have learned from the work of
people like boltzman and and Gibbs and
people of that nature a long time ago
we've learned that if you take a step
back and view the system as a
statistical Ensemble as an average it's
much easier to figure out on average how
the system will evolve over time systems
tend to go from low entropy to high
entropy from order toward disorder and
we can make that quite precise in the
mathematical articulation and that
allows us to understand overall how
systems will change through time without
having to get into the detailed
microscopic
calculations okay so there's some
lications from that as far as I can tell
one is that time itself is is in is a
macroscopic
phenoma and
then the other the see there there's
times when it seems to me and correct me
if I'm wrong that you're moving
something like a psychological frame of
reference into the
physical uh conceptualizations because
for example you you described a
situation where if there was a room full
of
air one of the potential configurations
is that all the air molecules are
clustered in one corner at at least it's
denser there now it's going to be the
case that on average the vast majority
of possible configurations of molecules
in of air molecules in a room are going
to uh be characterized by something
approximating uh random dispersement and
so that fraction of potential
configurations where there's uh what
would you say there's uh differences in
average density are going to be rare but
what you you you did say that you use
the term ordered and I'm guess I'm
wondering if there is a
physical definition for
order because the the the the
configuration
where there's density differences is has
a certain probability it's very low but
it has a certain probability there isn't
anything necessarily that marks it out
as distinct from the rest of the
configurations except its comparative
Rarity and but you can't Define any
given configuration as differentially
rare because every single configuration
is equally rare so how does the concept
of
order how how do you how do you clarify
the concept of order from from the
perspective of pure physics yes and and
so you're absolutely right when you
begin to delineate configurations that
you describe as ordered or disordered
low entropy or high entropy It Is by
virtue of seeing the group to which they
belong as opposed to analyzing them as
individuals on their own terms and when
we invoke words like order and disorder
obviously those are human
psychologically developed terms and and
where does it come from it comes from
the following basic fact which is if you
have a situation that typically we
humans would call ordered for instance
if you have books on a shelf that are
all
alphabetical there are very few ways
that the books can meet that Criterion
in fact if you're talking about making
them alphabetical there's only one
configuration that will meet that very
string definition of order you could
have other definitions of order like all
the blue ones are here and all the red
covers are here then there's a few you
can mix up the blues you can mix up the
Reds but you can't mix them together so
again you have a definition of ordered
disordered is when you can have any of
those configurations at all so clearly
an ordered configuration is one that's
harder to achieve it's more special it
differs from the random configur
configuration that would arise in its
own right if you weren't imposing any
other restrictions and so that's why we
use those words but you're absolutely
right those words are of human orig and
they do
require yeah it's partly improbability
and Rarity and then the while the
emotional component seems to come in in
that it's not only rare and unlikely but
it also has some degree of functional
significance I mean the reason that you
alphabetize your books is so that you
can find them and so it's a rare
configuration that has functional
utility and that's and that's not a bad
definition of order but the problem with
that from a purely physical perspective
is it's definition that involves some
subjective element of of analysis so
that's that's fine it does and this has
bother but I should say this has
bothered physicists for a very long time
that when you invoke the notion of
entropy unlike most other laws in
physics like you know Einstein's
equations of general relativity or
Newton's equations for the motion of
objects you can write down the symbols
everybody knows exactly what they means
and you can simply apply them and start
with a given configuration and figure
out definitively what it will look like
later entropy and thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics which is the area
of physics that we're talking about here
is of a different character because for
instance the second law of
thermodynamics that speaks about the
increase of entropy going from order to
disorder you know your books are nice
and alphabetized but you pull them out
you start to put them back and you're
going to lose the alphabetical order
unless you're very careful about putting
the books back in it's more likely that
you get to this disordered state where
they're no longer alphabetized in the
future but that's not a law that's a
statistical tendency it is absolutely
possible for systems to violate the
second law of Thermodynamics it's just
High improbable if I take a if I take a
handful of sand and I drop it on the
beach most of the time it's just going
to Splatter and move those sand
particles all over the surface but on
occasion is it possible that I drop that
handful of sand and it lands in a
beautiful sand castle statistically
unlikely probabilistically unlikely but
could it happen yes and if it did that
would be going from a disorder to an
ordered State violating the second law
of Thermodynamics so that that's why
this law is of a different character
than what we are used to in physics yeah
well that's what we've been trying to
wrestle with to some degree on the
neural science and and so so okay so let
me ask you another question it it's it's
probably obvious to you but I just also
want to make sure that I've got it right
is that there there is a widespread
consensus let's
say that the universe is expanding and
is there is there any difference between
that proclivity for the universe to
expand and the and and time itself and
also more specifically the forward
direction of time like is is the
expansion of the universe the macro
equivalent of the arrow of time at the
more micro and subjective level some
people have thought so there was a time
even when Steven Hawking a while ago
made a claim of a similar sounding sort
currently we do not believe so we have
theoretical models in which the universe
can expand and even then contract even
though the direction of time has not
reversed when the rate or direction of
expansion has changed and so the idea
that the way in which the universe
expands is intrinsically tied to the
arrow of time is not one that is
currently at all in favor in fact the
the is isue of the arrow of time is one
of the big perplexing questions which we
can only at the moment give the
following answer to when you're talking
cosmologically if entropy is meant to
increase toward the future than just
running it backward you'd think that
entropy must have been lower in the past
and if you take that directive and you
push it to its limits it would suggest
that at the Big Bang entropy was in a
real really low value really ordered
State now that's confusing because a we
don't really know how the universe came
into existence but B if it's so ordered
you ask yourself how did it get so
ordered I mean when the books on the
shelf or alphabetized we know how they
got ordered some intelligent being came
along you or me or my kid and put the
books in alphabetical order but if the
moment of creation was so highly ordered
the question is who did that or what did
that or what's the origin of this order
and this is a vital question because if
the Big Bang was not highly ordered if
it was disordered if it had high entropy
there'd be no opportunity for ordered
structures like stars and planets and
life forms to ever exist so we owe our
existence to the apparent fact that the
Big Bang was highly ordered given the
opportunity for ordered structures to
then emerge as the the unfolding and
change what's the relationship okay I
have two questions on that front then
what's the relationship between the
ordered State at the hypothetical big
bang and the emergence of order on the
cosmological and Galactic level
following the big bang I don't
understand that relationship and then so
that's one question the other question
is you know I read um A Brief History of
Time a long time ago um so I have I want
to ask a couple of questions about that
so when the universe is Contracting
within Hawkings model there is this
proclivity as you just pointed out for
everything to move from a state of
relative disorder and dispersal to a
state of relative order and Hawking
seemed to imply in that book that that
meant that the arrow of time was running
backwards but I but that puzzled me in
in two ways and one would be that there
could still be all sorts of random
perturbations and systems that were
collapsing and the other is that it
seems to me that the notion of quantum
uncertainty also disproves the idea that
the time of the arrow of time would run
backwards in some deterministic way
because there's no so okay so that's the
question on the Hawking side so yep so
let me to answer those in reverse order
because it's it's worthwhile noting that
Hawking himself changed his mind on this
point regarding the reversal of the
arrow of time upon contraction so much
of your concern with that is actually
borne out by our views as well so nobody
really takes seriously this idea anymore
that the arrow of time would reverse but
the first question of how do you get the
ordered structures like stars and
galaxies from this big bang beginning is
a is a deep one and I believe that we
have some insight into that which more
or less goes like this the Big Bang
happens Universe starts swelling rapidly
and the energy that drove that expansion
then disintegrates into a bath of
particles that fill space now you might
think about the particles filling space
that sounds disordered that sounds
really high entropy like the gas in this
room the particles are filled out
through the room perhaps things would
just stay that way and there would never
be clumps of particles and what changes
is When Gravity matters and it does on
cosmological scales it doesn't matter in
this room gravity is irrelevant to the
air molecules in this room but gravity
does matter if you have enough particles
filling space and that certainly happens
with the universe as a whole and what
that means is gravity starts to pull
little inhomogeneties a little denser
knot of particles here a little less
dense over here the denser one starts to
pull in more particles it gets denser
still and because it's denser its
gravitational pull is yet stronger and
it pulls in more particles and ultim you
get these locations where particles
begin to implode in on themselves
getting hotter and denser ultimately
igniting nuclear processes and a star is
born and the beautiful thing about this
and this is incredibly subtle but the
beautiful thing is this formation of the
star is indeed a drop in entropy a star
is more ordered than the original
configurations but in the formation of
the star the star gives off heat and
light that emits entropy to The Wider
environment I like to call this the
entropic twostep entropy goes down in
the formation of the star but it goes up
in the wider environment and overall the
entropic balance works the overall
entropy goes up even though you get a
pocket of order in the wake of that
entropic increase okay human beings do
that too exactly that's what we do right
so you know we eat food we take in these
orderly sources of energy we burn that
fuel to allow biological processes to
take place keeping our entropy low but
in the process we give off heat we expel
waste and if you take account of that
then the overall entropy of us and the
environment does go up but our entropy
is able to kind of thumb its nose at the
second law of Thermodynamics at least
while we're living and are able to keep
our entropy
stable go going online without Express
VPN is like not paying attention to the
safety demonstration on a flight most of
the time you'll probably be fine but
what if one day that weird yellow mask
drops down from overhead and you have no
idea what to do in our hyperconnected
world your digital privacy isn't just a
luxury it's a fundamental right every
time you connect to an unsecured Network
in a cafe hotel or airport you're
essentially broadcasting your personal
information to anyone with a technical
knowhow to intercept it and let's be
clear it doesn't take a genius hacker to
do this this with some off-the-shelf
Hardware even a techsavvy teenager could
potentially access your passwords Bank
logins and credit card details now you
might think what's the big deal who want
my data anyway well on the dark web your
personal information could fetch up to
$11,000 that's right there's a whole
underground economy built on Stolen
identities enter expressvpn it's like a
digital Fortress creating an encrypted
tunnel between your device and the
internet their encryption is so robust
that it would take a hacker with a super
computer over a billion years to crack
it but don't let its power fool you
express VPN is incredibly userfriendly
with just one click you're protected
across all your devices phones laptops
tablets you name it that's why I use
expressvpn whenever I'm traveling or
working from a coffee shop it gives me
peace of mind knowing that my research
Communications and personal data are
shielded from prying eyes secure your
online data today by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expressvpn.com
Jordan and you can get an extra 3 months
free expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan so let me ask you a question
about that in initial
clumping um it it occurred to me um I'm
sure this isn't an original idea that so
if that initial state that initial State
immediately after the big bang can't be
homogeneous perfectly homogeneous
because Quantum uncertainty with regards
to the positioning of the particles
would mean that there would be some lack
of homogeneity and the explanation you
gave seems to imply that even minor
deviations in homogeneity would start a
clumping process um would begin the
clumping process and then once it starts
it's going to it's going to capitalize
on itself and so is it is is it is the
lack of homogeneity after the big bang a
direct consequence of quantum
uncertainty with regards to the position
of the particles it is it is that's
exactly right and it's even more than
just an interesting idea what we've been
able to do and these are calculations
that go back to the 1980s we've been
able to model the early universe
mathematically using quantum physics
using Einstein's general relativity and
we've been able to
calculate how the uncertainty in the
positions and the energies and the
speeds of the particles should affect
the environment and we've been able to
calculate that it should cause tiny in
homogeneities as well in the temperature
of the night sky in the temperature of
space which means that if you could
measure the temperature of the night sky
to adequate Precision you should be able
to test the prediction and this is what
we have been able to do with the
so-called Cosmic microwave background
radiation this is heat left over from
The Big Bang and starting in the 199 90s
with ever greater Precision we've used
space telescopes and other devices to
measure the temperature of space and the
agreement between the theoretical
predictions and the observations is so
incredibly accurate that to see the
error bars in the measurements you have
to magnify them by like a factor of 500
so that the naked eye can even see them
on the graph that's how tightly there is
an agreement between the mathematical
calculations that we humans do these
little biological systems crawling
around this planet barely coming of age
in the Milky Way galaxy been able to
calculate conditions billions of years
ago and compare them to observations and
they agreed to spectacular Precision
this is one of the great triumphs of
modern science I see so you could detect
lack of homogeneity in the background
temperature and that was also indicative
of lack of H homogeneity in terms of
dispersal of particle dens
exactly oh wow okay that's very cool all
right so that is so that's so
interesting because that implies as well
that that or indicates that Quantum
uncertainty makes it impossible for
there to be a homogeneous distribution
of particles it's there going to be
there's going to be asymmetries emerge
and those asymmetries right and then the
asymmetries expand up until they
manifest themselves at a cosmological
level with stars and galaxies yes and
those large filaments that the galaxies
appear to congregate in and wow okay so
that's how that we are we are the we are
the progeny we are the progeny of
quantum uncertainty RIT large Across the
Universe right right right okay okay so
all right let me if you don't mind I
have one other specific question before
I turn to maybe the more particular
details of of your of your work
especially with regards to string theory
so you know I've I've been perplexed
like so many people with the double slit
EXP experiment and the fact that if you
I'll just review it for people very
briefly if you shine light through a uh
uh say a cardboard sheet that has slits
in it and you put a photographic plate
behind it you can produce interference
patterns that are uh that you can
capture with with the photographic
Emulsion and uh the hypothesis is that
when the light beams go through the
slits they interfere with one another
and so you get these variegated zebra
like patterns on the photographic
Emulsion but the peculiar thing about
that setup is that if you slow the
transmission of the light through the
slits down to one Photon per unit of
time so that there's only one Photon
being admitted you still get the
interference patterns okay so so I had a
thought about that and I want you to
correct it if if it's wrong or or
indicate if it's right so my
understanding is that as that at the
speed of light the universe is flat
perpendicular to the direction of the
travel of the light beam and that there
is no time and so is it not fair to say
that from the perspective of the photons
like from our perspective we're firing
one Photon at a time but from the
perspective of the light beam the light
beams
there's no difference between the one
Photon at a time State and
the and the shining a light beam that's
composed of an indefinite number of
photons at the same time if there's no
time from the perspective of the light
beam that it's all the same to the light
whether it's one Photon at a time or or
a plethora of light now so I don't
exactly understand what that means
because I can't understand the
difference between the time free frame
of reference that the light beam has and
and
our expansion of that but it it it is
there something wrong in my Reckoning
with regards to the idea that that time
is collapsed and so it's irrelevant from
the perspective of the light well what I
would say there is that from a poetic
sensibility if you apply Einstein's
special theory of relativity to the
frame of reference of a photon then the
things that you say are correct but I
always caution my students against
taking that perspective because what
you're ultimately doing is you're
infusing the photon with the very things
that we care about such as time and
space and interference patterns but the
photon doesn't have any capacity to care
about those things like the photon
doesn't have any conscious experience
what we want to do is explain our
experiences in our frame of reference
and in our frame of reference Photon
upon Photon upon Photon do have temporal
separations so while while it's kind of
Minds slapping to imagine yourself in
the perspective of a photon it's not a
perspective that any material object can
ever have the special thing about a
photon is that it's massless and only
massless objects can ever achieve the
speed of light and that's why us and
Mater objects will never have that
perspective so if we want to explain the
things that we encounter the things that
we experience we have to use a frame of
reference that is not moving at the
speed of light in the manner that you
described and so if it offers some sort
of poetic insight to imagine that
there's no time from the point of view
of a photon there's no space it's all
been Loren contracted infinitely far
these are actually pushing Einstein's
ideas a little too far poetically you
can do it but Einstein's der ation of
time dilation and Loren contraction it
all was from the perspective of a
massive body that was not itself
traveling at light speed right well I
guess the the the reason I was thinking
along those lines wasn't so much at
least as far as I was concerned for
poetic reasons but to explain the fact
that the interference actually still
happens if if the reality and not merely
subjective reality if the reality that
the photon is operating in lacks the
temporal dimension because it's
contracted then of course it's going to
the
interference um the interference
phenomenon is still going to make itself
manifest and that seems to me maybe I'm
misunderstanding you but that seems to
me to be more than merely poetic it
seems to me to be an explanation for why
the for why the interference phenomena
still makes itself manifest it's all
happening at the same time as far as the
from the I I don't mean the subjective
perspective of the light beam because as
you pointed out that's preposterous and
because it doesn't have a perspective
but it still is interacting with its
other with the with the other photons in
that in that setup because the temporal
Dimension is collapsed and that seems to
be an explanation go ahead but again
it's pushing Einstein's special
relativity to a place that it doesn't
technically apply so when Einstein
derived all of the ideas that you're
implicitly making use of that there's
this thing called time delay which
becomes infinitely big at light speed or
this thing called Lorent contraction
that becomes you know infinitely small
at light speed Einstein's derivation
only worked for speeds that were less
than the speed of light not equal to the
speed of light so there's a technical
glitch and trying to actually push that
idea through and so what we have been
forced to do is stick with the
perspective that we actually have in the
laboratory and try to explain what we
see which is utterly bizarre as you set
it up that individual photons that are
encountering this barrier with the two
openings somehow still produce this
interference pattern that is a WAV like
phenomenon but what does it mean to have
a wave when you've got one particle
right that's the big puzzle and the
solution that we've come to is that
individual particles do themselves have
a WAV like quality an unexpected one
it's a Quantum wave that was introduced
by the great thinkers in the early part
of the 20th century beginning with
Einstein and then Neils Bor and wner
Heisenberg and Iran Stringer and Max
Bourne and Paul D and all the people who
developed these ideas but the bottom
line is individual particles have a
spread out wavelike quality and that
wave is not an electromagnetic wave it's
not a wave of light if it's a photon say
rather it's a probability Wave It's a
wave that no one had ever anticipated
arising in our understanding of the
physical world the idea being the best
you can ever do is predict the
likelihood of the probability of a
particle being here or here or there
unlike what Newton would have said
Newton would have said just tell me
where the particle is in how fast it's
moving right now and I'll use my math to
tell you exactly where it will be later
on and quantum physics had to turn to
Newton and say you're asking for an
impossibility you can't tell where a
particle is and how fast it's moving
there's Quantum uncertainty and the best
you can do because of that is predict
probabilities of a particle being one
place or another right okay so so let me
delve into that a little bit I know
that's like impossibly incomprehensible
in a in a in a way but the the wave that
you're describing as a probability wave
that's the possibility that a given
phenomena let's say speed and location
might make itself manifest but it's it's
indeterminate there's some circumstances
under which it's
indeterminate and I don't exactly
understand the circumstances under which
it's indeterminate in conventional
quantum mechanics it would be all
situations conventional quantum
mechanics would say you physicists or
you human beings you're asking for too
much your intuition based on everyday
experience has misled you into thinking
that you can talk about the position and
the speed of objects you can't you can
talk about one or the other or you can
talk approximately about each but you
can't delineate both simultaneous with
total Precision it's simply can't be
done you've been misled by Common
experience macroscopic experience
macroscopic experience is a completely
misleading guide to how the microscopic
World works and you know we really
shouldn't be too surprised by that why
should it be the case that the things
that we experience in everyday life also
govern the incredibly small or the
incredibly big and turns out that they
don't but I will say one thing just on
the side there are alternative ways of
talking about quantum physics and
articulating it mathematically that have
not achieved the kind of widespread
acceptance as the version that I'm
relying upon in our conversation here
and in some of those alternative
versions which are perfectly good they
make the same predictions you have a
situation where you can delineate a
particle speed and position they are
determinate the indeterminacy comes into
the equations in a different manner so
this is an approach that was developed
by David B it was developed by Louis de
Bry it got completely ignored in the
history of quantum physics for the most
part there are some people who think
about it today but I only raise this to
say even with a subject like quantum
physics which we can now use to make
predictions that agree with experiments
to nine or 10 decimal PL places that's
how precise these ideas are there's
still an interpretive quality there's
still a struggling to make sense of what
it is that it's really telling us about
reality and there are alternate versions
that are out there right now that in
principle are each as good as the other
in the minds of their different
proponents right right so it's useful to
keep in mind the fact that those
interpretive that there's a variety of
opinions with regards to yeah the
plethora of interpretive Frameworks that
might be appropriate so yeah there is a
dominant there's a dominant one I don't
want to give an incorrect view most
physicists who you talk to will speak in
the manner that we were a moment to go
but I always feel that it's worthwhile
pointing out that that's not the only
way that you can talk about quantum
physics in today's chaotic World many of
us are searching for a way to aim higher
and find spiritual peace but here's the
thing prayer the most common tool we
have isn't just about saying whatever
comes to mind it's a skill that needs to
be developed that's where hallow comes
in as the number one prayer and
meditation app hallow is launching an
exceptional new series called how to
pray imagine learning how to use
scripture as a Launchpad for profound
conversations with God how to properly
enter into imaginative prayer and how to
incorporate prayers reaching far back in
church history this isn't your average
guided meditation it's a comprehensive
two-e Journey Into the Heart of prayer
led by some of the most respected
spiritual leaders of our time from
guests including Bishop Robert Baron
father Mike schmidtz and Jonathan roomy
known for his role as Jesus in the hit
series The Chosen you'll discover prayer
techniques that have stood the test of
time while equipping yourself with the
tools needed to face life's challenges
with renewed strength ready to
revolutionize your prayer life you can
check out the new series as well as an
extensive catalog of guided prayers when
you download the Hallow app just go to
hall.com Jordan and download the Hallow
app today for an exclusive 3-month trial
that's hall.com Jordan
elevate your prayer life
today do you this is a very ill formed
question um and it it it sort of pushes
me to the edge of my understanding I've
spent a lot of time studying mythology
and um the ordering effect of
Consciousness is something that's
represented in deep
narratives
universally and the story is something
like an ordering agent encountering a
field of possibility and casting it into
a determinant and and somewhat fixed
order so for example in the Genesis
account the uh the waste and Chaos that
the spirit of God encounters is the toou
vabo and it's it's something like a
field of potential and I've been curious
about that about the relationship
between that and these ideas at a
Quantum level that the ground of reality
at the most fundamental material Level
starts to become something other than
the determinant particles of dust that
we're familiar with from our day-to-day
experience that it's something like a
realm
of Realm isn't precisely the right word
but I'll use it because I don't have a
better one a realm of Poss possibility
that can be cast into the actuality of
the present and the past and so I'm
wondering how you understand that that
wave you know you were careful to
distinguish it from the electromagnetic
wave form and you're talking about it as
a if I understand it correctly as a
field of possibility a field of of of
actualizable possibility that exists in
potential whatever that means before
it's actualized into an actual event and
so how how do you or do you understand
that field of possibility and what
existential or phenomenological
significance might that have do do you
have any sense of what that might
mean it's a deep and very difficult
question and let me just give you a
little bit of insight as to why it's so
difficult that may not be obvious from
what we've discussed so far if we have a
single particle of Photon or electron we
can talk about its probability wave as
existing in ordinary three dimensions
because after all telling us the
possible the potential locations that
that particle might occupy and of course
those locations exist in three
dimensions but if you have two particles
that wave doesn't now exist in three
dimensions it exists in Six Dimensions
because there are three locations where
the first particle might be and they
three coordinates I should say that
would delineate the location of the
second par so three coordinates for the
first three coordinates for the second
if you have three particles that wave
lives in nine Dimensions four particles
it lives in 12
Dimensions you know if you have a
trillion particles that wave lives in
three trillion D how do you think about
that wave so that wave as something that
for one particle is at least It's Tricky
but at least you can envision it as you
know some gossamer substance that's
filling space and where that gossamer
substance is a little bit you know more
opaque high probability where it's
thinner low you can think about you can
cogitate on that I don't know how to
cogitate on the version that describes
many particles because it's beyond my
capacity to Envision the arena within
which that wave exists so it's a tough
tough question and and sort of the way
it relates at least the way I try to
make it relate to the kinds of topics
that you were speaking of be it the
Bible be it mythology I sort of see
reality as stated stratified into
different layers that all relate to each
other and you need to choose the right
language the right story if you will to
gain insight into whatever layer you're
interested in and if you're interested
in the Rock Bottom reality quantum
physics is where you should absolutely
go if you're interested in the layer
where particles come together into
molecules well that's more chemistry how
they come together into cells more
biology how they come together into
living systems you know then you get
into self-consciousness neurology psych
I mean so you see all these nested
stories are they Reliant upon quantum
physics in the Rock Bottom reality they
are but the language that's more useful
at the higher levels of course is the
higher level language that we invoke and
so you know to me
mythology is this wonderful realm where
we human beings have struggled to find
coherence at the societal level to try
to understand our own mortality to try
to understand where we came from and
where we're going not from general
relativity but from a more human
standpoint and so that's where I see
those stories interfacing with the
cosmological and quantum mechanical
story okay so so you you talked about
the difficulty of mapping that three
trillion in dimension space let's say
that that emerges as a consequence of
the interaction of a plethora of of
particles I mean it it seems to me that
that's actually and this is a huge leap
and I'm not claiming it's correct but
there's something to it because of
course I'll lay it out first I mean we
we use imaginative projection to
Envision alternative potential Futures
right and we seem to concentrate on the
ones that are relatively statistically
likely like when you're i' I've been
thinking a lot about how Consciousness
operates and you know you can think of
us as deterministic creatures who are
driven by mechanical algorithms to move
forward robotically lock step as we're
driven by material causality but um you
can also think about us as uh imagin
Visionaries who flesh out Realms of
possibility and
then Implement processes to bring those
about and I think the
latter conceptualization is much more
accurate with regards to the contents of
our Consciousness because what
Consciousness focuses
on isn't constants Consciousness focuses
on variability so for example if
something unexpected happened in your
sensory field right at the moment you
would Orient towards it and you do that
well implicitly but your Consciousness
would focus on the the uncertainty and
the variability and so we seem to use
Consciousness to shape variability and
so I guess the first thing I'm wondering
is is it reasonable to suppose that the
purpose of the imagination is to map out
that dimensional multi-dimensional space
with regards to its most likely
configurations and the second question
is
this is a more oblique question is that
like is it reasonable to assume that the
possibility that Consciousness appears
to be contending to like the field of
possibility that opens up to your
imagination let's say when you wake up
in the morning and start to apprehend
the possibilities of the day is that a
manifestation of the what it's is that a
manifestation of that is it a higher
level manifestation of that field
possibility that characterizes the the
micro realm you know you know what I
mean there's possibility at the quantum
level does that
possibility make itself manifest all the
way up to to the to the level of macro
experience because we seem to be dealing
with something like possibility rather
than deterministic algorithmic actuality
and so there definitely is a a rhyming
between the two kinds of ideas for sure
but how is it that quantum physics at
that Rock Bottom story bubbles up and
influences conscious experience I don't
know and nobody does it's too complex a
problem right now but what I would say
is there are things about Consciousness
that The Rock Bottom story does give
insight into and one of the big ones is
Free Will right I mean there have been
arguments about Free Will going on for
thousands of years and to me it's quite
clear
that when you recognize if you believe
that the physical is all that there is
and I don't know that that is the case
but let's just take that as an
assumption for the moment that there's
no consciousness field that's out there
in the world that we somehow are tapping
into that there's no greater power
that's somehow beyond the laws of
physics if all we are are bags of
particles governed by physical law and
our brains are nothing but Gloppy three
pound collections of particles that are
organized sufficiently to somehow yield
the information processing that we call
conscious awareness if that's all that
it is and I think that is all that it is
then there's no opportunity for us to
have any freedom of the will because our
particles are going to do what they're
going to do governed by the quantum laws
and there's no opportunity for an i to
intercede in that lawful if
probabilistic projection so that's just
the way things work and so the view that
we can somehow cause our particles
perhaps to hold still for a moment wait
wait wait for Brian to make a decision
and once Brian makes a decision then
carry on with whatever motion that you
were going to do by the laws of physics
that's incoherent that's ludicrous and
so however much we may feel that we are
the ultimate authors of our actions I
don't see any opportunity for that
because we can't intercede in the lawful
progression of the particles that govern
whether I move my arm whether I say this
or I say that it's all just the motion
of particles that are in iated in my
biological form do you feel that what
what's your opinion about
okay you can make causally determinant
arguments very far very high up the
resolution
uh what what spectrum so the more the
more macro the system the more
deterministic processes seem to be at
play but when you push all the way down
to the micro
level you have this fundamental
indeterminacy and so why would you
presume that the deterministic argument
holds true given that at its most
fundamental basis there's indeterminacy
you know is isn't it the case that if
you wanted to make an algorithmic case
that you'd need like predictable
algorithmic causality all the way from
the most micro levels all the way up or
or are you making the case that once you
get to the macro level the determinacy
takes over to the point where there is
no possibility for such a thing as free
will no I think that the
indeterminacy of quantum physics turns
out to be irrelevant to the particular
story that I'm telling in the following
sense so what what I'm I'm not saying
that we are determinate in the sense
that I can't predict what you're going
to do next because you are ultimately a
Quantum system let me look re right down
at the level of your particles imagine I
could zoom in on you and see your
individual particles the best I can do
is predict the likelihood or the
probability that those particles are
going to evolve from one configuration
to another through time but that
probabilistic prediction that
uncertainty that's not freedom of your
will you aren't controlling which
outcome happens you aren't determining
which outcome is more likely or less
likely you still are just going along
for this probabilistic ride and so
whether physics is probabilistic as
quantum mechanics says or in the
classical determinate view that Isaac
Newton would have said we know it's the
former not the latter but even in the
former you aren in controlling that
uncertainty and therefore you aren't
controlling how things are unfolding you
aren't controlling what you do or what
you say at that fundamental level so you
are nothing but this collection of
particles still fully govern governed by
laws which I should say the quantum laws
as mathematical equations they are as
deterministic as the classical laws but
what they determine are likelihoods
probabilities and so once those
probabilities are determined by
mathematics you are out of the equation
and that's the way in which you don't
have the freedom of will that you feel
that you
do attention men who still believe in
the American dream in a world gone add
the Precision five from Jeremy's Razer
stands as a beacon of Sanity five Blades
of superior engineering offer a shave as
unshakable as your faith at the nation's
best days still lie ahead experience an
exceptionally smooth remarkably close
shave and a testament to the fact that
Merit still matters stop giving your
money to woke corporations that hate you
get Jeremy risers Precision 5 instead
available now at Jeremy razer.com
walmart.com and Amazon
Prime MH okay yeah I understand the
argument yes of course the the classic
what would you say rejoiner to that is
that you know we structure and I don't
know how to reconcile the two you know I
I'm not claiming that I do in the least
but you know we structure our societies
on the presumption of something
approximating responsible Free Will and
in so far as we do that we seem to be
able to hold people responsible help
them govern their behaviors integrate
them psychologically and produce stable
communities and so it's very strange
situation that the presumption of Free
Will seems to be a pragmatic and
metaphysical necessity but it's hard to
square with the kind of modeling that
emerges well in your argument either
from a more Newtonian deterministic view
of physics or even from the Quantum View
you know it's a gap that's I think I
have an answer I think I have an answer
to that but these are difficult issues
so I don't by any means think it's all
settled but I still think that in a
world of the sort that I've describe
which I think is our world I think you
still bear responsibility for your
actions it's of a slightly different
nature than the responsibility in a
world that does have freedom of the will
but if you are the causal actor that
results in a certain effect if you are
part of the causal chain that results in
certain things happening then you are
responsible for the things happen
because you are a link in the causal
chain and the closer your link is to the
outcome the more responsibility you bear
so what does that mean for atic right
right I see exactly and so so my view on
punishment from a societal perspective
is it can't be from the standpoint of
Retribution that would seem to require
free will if you're going to actually
take a punitive stance on someone's
Behavior but rather I think punishment
should be viewed as shaping future
behaviors based upon current action
I mean the example that I like to use to
sort of take this out of the emotional
realm of human beings imagine you have a
Roomba many of us do that cleans your
floor right that Roomba doesn't have
free will that's not controversial And
yet when that Roomba bounces or bangs
into Furniture it's intern if it's a
high-end version it modifies its
internal map of the space in order that
subsequently it doesn't bump into things
it doesn't do the wrong thing in the
future and so you can update your your
program you can update your behavior
based upon getting feedback and so if
punishment is viewed as feedback in
order to shape future Behavior then yes
we should punish people that are
responsible in the manner that I just
described for things that we view as
transgressing the rules that we
collectively have brought into existence
for society to be able to function we're
not punishing them because we're coming
from a standpoint of Retribution we're
coming from a standpoint of shaping
future Behavior right right so yeah so
that's a more behaviorist
conceptualization of the utility of
punishment the necessity of punishment
all right well I think I'll leave that I
think what we'll do now if if it's okay
with you is um turn to string theory and
I mean I'm I'm so ignorant about string
theory that it's kind of miracle and I
guess so I can I'm going to start by
asking you some basic questions I guess
the first question you know you touch
upon this in in the the second edition
of your 1999 book which is um the
elegant Universe super strings hidden
dimensions in the Quest for ultimate
Theory you've just updated that and uh
you open the book uh by explaining I
suppose the at least part of the problem
that string theories hypothetically
poised to solve and at least to some
degree that's the uh lack of unity
between the theories of general
relativity and the theories of the of
the Quant
of the quantum physicists and so maybe
you could explain to us first what it
means that those theories aren't unified
like what that means yeah what that
means in the scientific realm but also
what it means practically and then walk
us through how String Theory what string
theory is and how it constitutes a
potential solution to that uh to that
conundrum yeah so the two big
discoveries of the 20th century are
Einstein's general theory of relativity
which describes the force of gravity and
as we discussed before the force of
gravity matters when things are big
stars and galaxies in the whole universe
and in that domain Einstein's ideas have
been tested and they do an incredible
job of explaining things that we see in
the heavens the other big development
which we've spent some time already
talking about is quantum physics which
describes the Small Things molecules
atoms subatomic particles and in that
domain quantum physics has itself been
tested to incredible precision and it
works the crazy thing is in any
situation where you need to put quantum
physics and general relativity together
when you need to use the equations in
tandem you get
nonsensical results you get results like
Infinity is the only answer that you
ever get for any question that you pose
now you might say well do you ever need
to put them together quantum mechanics
is small general relativity is Big those
seem pretty separate but there are
extreme Realms like the center of a
black hole where a lot of mass has been
crushed to a very small size big Mass
general relativity small size quantum
physics or the Big Bang the entire
observable universe crushed to a very
small size a lot of mass energy small
size again you need general relativity
and quantum mechanics and so in those
extreme Realms you find that the
equations simply fall apart the laws of
general relativity laws of quantum they
do not play to well together they are
ferocious antagonists and that's the
problem that we've been trying to and
that produces these mathematical
absurdities that you've been describing
and interferes with our understanding I
guess there's the aesthetic problem too
which is that we're possessed by the
strong intimation that all forms of
descriptive knowledge should unify at
least not exist in contradiction to one
another that seems well it seems to
violate I don't know our understanding
of what understanding itself is and so
that's okay okay and so well so can you
give us a maybe a more tangible
indication of what s sort of absurdities
Might emerge in the conceptual realm
when you're dealing with something like
the the situation that obtains in a
black hole and you said that the the
equations will produce references to
Infinity continually which seem to be
non-helpful but that's still pretty
abstract for people who aren't math
atically oriented is there a way of
simplifying that so that it's more
graspable yeah so for imag imagine you
jump into a black hole inadvisable but
imagine you do it we know that as you
get closer and closer to the center of
the black hole things will start to feel
uncomfortable if you jumped in feet
first your feet are going to be pulled
more strongly than your head so your
body is going to stretch it's going to
spaghettify we call it ultimately it's
going to be pulled apart into its
constituents and those constituents are
then going to fall toward the center and
the Deep question is what finally
happens when you actually reach the
center and if you ask any physicists
today for the answer they would be
forced to tell you if they're honest we
don't know we just don't know what
happens at the center of the black hole
some ideas are it's a portal to another
universe that's a wild sci-fi sounding
idea it be wonderful it's the case but
we just don't know some people think
it's a location where time comes to an
end it's just where there's no notion of
time any further so these are the things
that we just don't know how to answer so
I have I have a question about that too
well my correct me if I'm wrong about
this but my understanding is that as
something falls into a black hole and
this is from the perspective of an
external Observer as it falls it it it's
transforming more and more slowly and
that that trans
decreases in in speed until it's really
at a standstill and so so that and so
I'm I'm wondering if that's the case and
that there's that time de delation
that's accompanied by descent into a
black
hole I'm I'm I'm trying to put like
vague imaginations here imaginings
together you have something that's very
very dense at the center of that and you
also have the time dilation process is
it and and you have the idea that at
some distant point in the future
everything is going to come back
together in a big crunch at least that's
one of the hypothesis like is there any
difference
between the destination point when a
given body is falling into a given black
hole and the Big Crunch itself like is
that destination point the same
destination point andan that would
account to some degree for the kind of
infinite density at at the center of the
black hole and it seems to make sense if
if time is dilating to that
degree that's the best I can do it's a
good question and certainly you're right
from the standpoint of an outside
Observer watching say you jump into a
black hole they will see you move slower
and slower as you reach the Event
Horizon the edge of the black hole and
in fact they will see you ultimately
come to a standstill right at the
Horizon itself but the amazing thing is
from your perspective you will fall
right through that event horizon you
will go right to the center and it will
happen in finite time it will not happen
in some long cosmological time it'll
happen in finite time and so it's not as
though the center of the black hole is
the Big Crunch if there is such a thing
for the universe but it is the case that
we believe that if we could answer the
question of what happens at the center
of a black hole we would then be able to
answer the question of what happens at
the Big Crunch or what happens at the
Big Bang because we Face exactly the
same issue if you weren't so interested
in black holes but you're interested in
How the Universe got started again ask
any physicist what really happened at
the moment of the Big Bang Time Zero
itself if the physicist is
straightforward Hest they say we don't
know for exactly the same reason that's
a realm where the density is so high
that you need general relativity where
quantum physics is vital because it's so
small and the equations break down and
the equ equations are the only tool that
we have to gain insight into Realms that
we can't literally visit and that's the
issue that we're trying to fix okay so
why does it matter that with from your
perspective you would continue falling
at a finite time with regard to the
question of whether what's at the bottom
of the black hole is the eventual
aggregation of all matter I I I
because looking at it from the outside
as that falling entity grinds to a halt
there's an infinite duration of time
that's now involved in the process and
in that infinite duration of time if the
Big Crunch models are correct that big
crunch is eventually going to occur so I
don't understand why they don't yeah why
why they don't necessarily dovetail
let's say or converge so our our yeah so
our goal is to be able to explain the
happenings in the universe from any and
all
perspectives the one thing that Einstein
taught us is that different perspectives
can tell very different stories about
the universe but our goal is to be able
to understand all those stories we want
to chronolog we want to Chronicle all
the narratives if you will that could be
told about the universe and so you're
right from the standpoint of the outside
Observer the chronicle you're telling is
correct infinite time yeah but we also
want to know the chronicle from the
person that could fall in as well yeah
right right right fair enough fair
enough U Okay so so let's go back to
string theory so you made the case that
the um
the equations that govern general
relativity and quantum mechanics don't
dovetail well and that poses certain
interpretive problems and you outlined
what they might be and uh I don't
remember if we did try to nail that down
so that it was more comprehensible if we
got out of the realm of mathematical
Infinity to point out some of the I
maybe that's where we went into the
discussion of the black hole but but
okay so okay fine so let's let's talk
about you know how string theory in
principle reconciles that I'm also
curious you know there's a lot of
physicists who are very skeptical about
spring String Theory as an Enterprise
and so I guess I'm also wondering has
the have the proponents of this Theory
come up with a explanation that adds
additional predictive validity to the
combined use of the theories of general
relativity and of quantum mechanics so
what is string theory and then why
should we believe that the suppositions
of the string theorists have any
validity yeah so they're both good
questions start with the first one so
the basic conventional way of talking
about String Theory the way I spoke
about it even in the elegant Universe
back in
1999 is a slight shift in how we
envision the fundamental ingredients
of matter the old view that we've been
talking about in quantum mechanics are
these little particles they are
described by probability waves but the
particle itself is a little
infinitesimal dot the electron or the
photon String Theory says that you need
to update that picture think now of the
electron as a little tiny vibrating
filament a little tiny vibrating string
like filament think of the photon as a
little tiny vibrating string like
filament and the difference vibrations
of the string just like the string and a
violin produces different musical tones
the different vibrational patterns of
these little strings don't produce
different music they produce the
different particles so a photon is a
string vibrating in one pattern electron
is string vibrating in a different
pattern and so forth that's the basic
idea now why do we invoke that idea and
what does vibration mean is you know I
mean in that situation what does
vibration mean and what's vibrating and
maybe those are nonsensical questions
like the color they're not they're not
nonsensical they're tough questions so
so what is the string made of the best
answer I can give it's made of string
stuff it's made of energy if I could
delineate something yet more fine from
which the string was built our Focus
would be on that finer constituent it
may be if these ideas are correct that
this is the finest ingredient period end
of story we don't know that of course
but that is one way of thinking about
the theory and so the remarkable thing
and this is not obvious and a little
difficult to explain in words but I will
say that mathematically when you make
the move from a point particle to a
filament the problems between general
relativity and quantum mechanics they go
away all of a sudden these two theories
can play well together the Infinities
that we were talking about from the
conventional formulation are quelled
they're tamped down you can make
sensible calculations at least in
principle and that's why this idea took
off in the 1980s I see so now is that
okay so one of the problems that
non-physicists have and I presume
physicists as well is that as WE peer
more and more deeply into the micro
realm we get farther and farther away
from our embodied axiomatic
presuppositions right I mean we're we're
accustomed to dealing with objects in
the macro world that operate like macro
World objects and then as we increase
our resolution the things we're looking
at increasingly don't act like that and
so they escape from our really our
axiomatic or a prior understanding which
is very deeply embodied and so you
already have that problem at the level
of the electron and the photon and it
seems to me not improbable that that
problem would be multiplied if you
increase the level of resolution past
that so is there any possibility
whatsoever of the non mathematically
inclined Observer of even understanding
what it means forther to be filaments or
forther to be vibrations or are those
like second order castings of things
that have to essentially be
mathematical well they are ultimately
mathematical the imagery that we paint
in words is a reasonable approximation
to what we believe the mathematics is
telling us so it's not far from a
reasonable poetic description of what's
Happening down there but you're
absolutely right it's so far from common
experience we're talking about distance
scales that make the atomic seem large
by comparison so we're way way down at a
distance scale of like 10 the minus 33
cm you know an atom is like you know 10
to the minus 10 centimeters or something
so we're talking 20 orders of magnitude
smaller than an atomic ingredients so
we're far far from The Familiar things
that we use to base our understanding of
the world upon right but the question
then you ask is how do you test this and
what practical use is it yeah well
quantum mechanics is obviously insanely
practically useful I mean it's produced
technologies that are World transforming
so but let me just point out on that
because that's a very vital realization
if you would have asked the people who
develop quantum mechanics like Neil's
bore and and Schrodinger if you ask them
way back in the
1920s what's the Practical utility of
what you're working on I'm pretty sure
they would have said not much we're just
trying to understand and so then it's 80
years later we go from understanding to
harnessing so I always find it dangerous
to talk about practical utility of ideas
when they're being formulated because it
may be a century more before they're
actually put in practice but but you
still need to ask the question why
should you believe any of this stuff are
there any experimental tests yes yes
well the same was true of Maxwell when
he discovered Electric right
electromagnet magnetism yeah so and I'm
always and in the elegant Universe back
in 1999 and today I am forthright in
saying there are no experimental
observations there are no definitive
predictions that we can test with
today's technology so we have not been
able to bridge the gap between the
theory and the observation they say what
the heck are you guys doing why are you
still thinking about something and the
answer is we have made such stunning and
I am saying this from the perspective of
someone who's lived a life of
mathematics you know we've made stunning
mathematical advances in this field that
are beyond anything that most of us
would have thought remotely possible to
have occurred by today we've understood
the equations we've been able to gain
insight into the nature of black holes
not answering that fundamental
Singularity question but we understand
the Horizon of a black hole the entropy
of a black hole we've made progress in
understanding the way in which this
mathematics paints a vastly new picture
of reality some of the developments just
in the last few years are are absolutely
mind-blowing so if you are like me and
many of my colleagues willing to defer
observation and experiment for now not
forever but defer it now develop the
mathematics in the hope that this risk
that we are taking that this math may
not be relevant to the world but if it
is it will give us the deepest
explanation
of how the world came to be and how it
came into existence and the fundamental
ingredients and how they behave that
makes the risk for some of us worth
taking it's not a risk worth taking for
everybody this is where human nature
comes into science some scientists God
bless them they're vital need to have an
ongoing dialogue with experiment and
observation for them to feel that what
they're doing matters other scientists
are willing to defer that dialogue
develop the mathematics for however long
it will take if you feel that the math
is progressing at a rate that's
sufficiently gratifying and satisfying
to make you feel that you're en root
toward truth and that's the kind of
person that works on string theory
there's no right or wrong here it's a
matter of scientific taste so science
you could imagine has two polls and one
would be hypothesis generation which is
a relatively mysterious poll and the
other would be verification and testing
and it it's always the case that the
hypothesis generation Horizon exceeds
the testing Horizon because otherwise
the hypothesis would be trivial now and
then the question would be well to what
degree are you temperamentally capable
of what would you say appreciating that
Gap and there's going to be wide
individual differences in that they're
probably related to something like trait
openness but the notion that the
hypothesis should exceed the data is
that's a trism in in in in some regard
now that does open up a very complex
question which is how do you in the
absence of experimental verification how
do you determine which hypotheses Aren't
Dead ends and that seems to have
something to do with it's something like
pattern recognition you know I mean one
of the ways that we determine that
something is real is by Quint angulating
I suppose with our senses and if we can
detect something in five dimensions in
the five sensory dimensions then we
assume that it's real sometimes after
talking to other people who are doing
the same thing but the great pattern
recognizers who are the hypothesis
generators in science seem to do
something approximately the same in the
absence of experimental proof right
they're they're using a vast variety of
information sources to determine whether
their hypothesis are valid as opposed to
say you know delusional conspiracy
theories or their approximation so and
you think the string theorists are okay
so what is it and I think we'll delve
into this more particularly on The Daily
wire side I think maybe actually we'll
turn to that because we are coming to
the to the end of our discussion so I
think what I'm going to do on the daily
wire side for everybody who's watching
and listening is to continue talking to
Brian about the development of his
interest in in the microcosmic realm and
why in particular he was attracted to uh
investigation of string theory per se
there's lots of potential places that
someone with interest in physics might
go and so I'm I'm always interested in
the biographical element so I think
we'll pursue that on the daily wire side
and so um is there anything else that
you can tell people that would flesh out
their understanding of string theory in
in relatively short order I mean I know
that's a tall order but um I'm still the
we we talked about these filaments and
their
vibrations I mean it what's the nature
of that vibration I mean we know that
light waves vary in their quality and
they're be because of of different
frequency of vibration let's say and so
that plays a fundamental role in the
phenomenology of everyday being and so
it's obviously the case that difference
in vibrations can be of crucial
importance like is there an analogy
between electromagnetic
frequency in the case of photons and the
vibrations of the filaments and then how
do you understand the the nature of the
filament because filament sounds
material like it sounds like it's
something that should be made of other
things you know like a like an ordinary
object well our everyday experience
certainly teaches us that any extended
object which is all objects we encounter
in the real world can be cut up into
smaller things and experien has taught
us that if you cut fine enough you may
find new ingredients that were not
visible or available or something that
you would have recognized on the
macroscopic scale if you take that idea
and you bring it into the micro world
you would think that a string itself
could be cut up into Finer Things and
maybe you'll find Ultimate constituents
but again we don't know if that
macroscopic notion applies in the
microscopic realm so you have to be very
careful taking things that you're
familiar with in the macro world and
just porting them into the micro world
so again it might be that we and there
have been some studies that have
suggested the possibility that strings
May themselves be made up of smaller
ingredients but there's also a whole
literature that suggests that they may
be the fundamental entity in a certain
domain of the theory and there isn't
something finer within them but let me
give one if you if you don't mind
because you were saying we're going to
slightly wrapping up this part I want to
leave one idea which is one of the more
spectacular ones it will just take me a
moment to describe of of recent in sight
in string theory many of your your
viewers and listeners may be familiar
with the idea of quantum entanglement
which is the idea that two distant
particles can have kind of a invisible
Quantum link between them where what you
do in one particle instantaneously
affects the other particle the particles
are said to be Quantum entangled a
mind-blowing idea that comes from the
work of Albert Einstein in
1935 your viewers listeners may also be
familiar with the notion of a wormhole a
completely different idea that in
general relativity you can have a tunnel
through the fabric of space linking one
location and the other Einstein
developed that idea too in 1935 just two
months apart from quantum entanglement
for 90 years nobody thought there was
any connection between these two ideas
string theory has recently revealed that
it's very likely that these two ideas
are the same idea described in different
languages that when you have two
particles that are quantum entangled in
some sense there is a tunnel through the
fabric of space a wormhole that is
connecting them together and if this
idea holds up it shows that a general
relativistic idea a tunnel through the
fabric of space and a Quantum idea
quantum entanglement across space are
the same idea which would suggest that
general relativity and quantum mechanics
are deeply connected from the Geto it's
not so much that we need to find a way
of bringing them into Union they may
already already be in Union and what we
need to do with string theory or
whatever approach is understand that
intrinsic relationship more fully this
is the New Perspective that has emerged
in the last decade and it's a thrilling
one all right sir well I think that's a
that's a good place to end that's a nice
ending and so I think we will in fact do
that and so for everybody who is
watching and listening well thank you
for your time and attention thank you to
the Daily wire people for making the
public distribution of this podcast
possible thank you very much sir for
spending the time today delineating out
your ideas that's much appreciated and
uh my pleasure thank you yeah yeah my
pleasure and uh and good luck on the
second edition of your book uh when did
it come
out uh I think last week oh yeah and
how's it do came out I have no idea I've
not been tracking it okay okay well
that's an exciting thing to to that'll
be an exciting thing to encounter with
any luck and so um yeah well thank again
for for talking to us today and then
reme reminder for everybody who's
watching and listening we're going to
delve into um the origin of of Dr
Green's interests and how they developed
across time it's very useful to talk to
people who've been successful in their
field of endeavor to find how that
pathway made itself manifest to them
across the uh ups and downs of their
life and why they stuck with it and what
made them and what made them successful
um everybody has to find out what
compels them and interests them in their
life if they're going to adjust to the
difficulties of their existed
successfully and gaining some insight
into that process is always useful so
that's what we'll delve into on The
Daily wire side so everybody can join us
for that if they're so inclined all
right sir thank you very much much
appreciate the discussion today thank
you
[Music]
n